---
title: "Automatically start tmux in bash"
date: 2024-11-18T23:18:36-05:00
---

I have become accustomed to having tmux running, which allows me to keep a
single terminal open on my screen and create as many sub-terminals as I need in
my work.

However, I don't want to have to remember to start tmux every time I start a
terminal, and often I forget until the first time I try to split the pane or
create a new tmux window.

I also am in the habit of exiting shells manually (rather that close the whole
terminal window), but if I start tmux manually, I have to exit both tmux *and*
the shell itself, which gets tiresome.

To address both of these things, I put the following at the top of my `.bashrc`:

```bash
if [ ! "$TMUX" ]; then
  exec bash -c 'tmux new-session'
fi
```

This bash code starts a new tmux session for every terminal I start (unless the
TMUX variable is set, which indicates we're already in a tmux session. We use
`exec` because we want to replace the launching process with the new process
(tmux). By replacing the parent /bin/bash process with the child tmux process,
we can exit the whole shell with one exit call.

This does potentially create a bunch of tmux sessions if we open multiple
terminals, but that's okay, it's actually sort of nice to be able to recover a
closed terminal session. Here's how to do that:

First, we can list the existing tmux sessions. I've named some of these
strangely, but the names (e.g. sess1) don't matter, they are just names:

```bash
$ tmux ls
5: 1 windows (created Mon Nov 18 23:14:41 2024)
sess1: 2 windows (created Mon Nov 18 23:06:07 2024) (attached)
sess2: 1 windows (created Mon Nov 18 23:06:11 2024)
sess3: 1 windows (created Mon Nov 18 23:06:19 2024)
```

If we're in a tmux session (which we probably are if we are using this pattern
of creating a session on every terminal open), we'll have to use
'switch-client'. The following will transfer us from session `sess1` to session
`sess2`:

```bash
$ tmux switch-client -t sess2
```
